# Operators

## Range Operator

There were many options for the range operator syntax. Initially, it was thought it should be inclusive of the start value and exclusive of the end value. This would make the common C `for` loop case the default. However, it was very difficult to come up with a good syntax for the inclusive case. After looking at Swift and reviewing the [operators used by other languages for range](http://rigaux.org/language-study/syntax-across-languages/VrsDatTps.html#VrsDatTpsRng) this was changed. It appears most languages use `..` to be inclusive of both ends. This then opens up `..<`, `<..` and `<..<` for ranges exclusive of their end values. This syntax was inspired by the Swift `..<` operator for half open ranges. It was decided that C style for loops should now be rare enough that it isn't an issue that they have a longer, more awkward syntax.

## Accept Operator

For years, an accept operator had been planned. This was to be the symbol `..` and would be used as the accept method in the visitor pattern. It would also be a way to take a function pointer and use it like a method on its first argument type. When Adamant was being designed, having a ranger operator was found to be important and `..` has become a defacto range operator. It is a good fit for this. While Swift uses `...` for this, it seems like that may be needed for something like list expansion. For a while it was thought that `..` could be used as both the accept operator and the range operator since the operand types would be distinct. However, those operators need to have radically different precedence. The range operator should have a fairly low precedence while the accept operator has a high precedence like member access does. Then it was thought these cases could be distinguished syntactically by looking for an invocation afterward. However, `x..y()` could equally mean that `x` accepts the visitor `y` or that a range is being constructed from `x` to the result of `y()`.

## Overload Not a Trait Implementation

Operators are not tied to simple methods on special traits the way they are in Rust because that would imply that they have universal semantics. That is, that every use of the operator is meant to have the same semantics. However, just like method names, the same operator can have two different meanings in different contexts. Indeed, a given operator may have different pre- and post- conditions on different types.

## Overloaded Operator Operand Placeholders

Inspired by the Agda language there had been thought of using `_` as a placeholder in operator overload declarations. At first, this was considered only to support future expansion of the language to support arbitrary mixfix operators. However, when the user and string literal operators were added, it seemed prudent to include the `_` placeholder with them. Then when overloading of the range operators was considered, it was realized first that they had both prefix and suffix unary forms to the placeholder was needed to distinguish these. Then it was further realized that there were both nullary and binary forms of these operators. Thus `..` would be a nullary operator while `_.._` would be a binary operator. For consistency, it then made the most sense to require the placeholders for all binary operators.

## Operators as Functions and Infix Functions

It was evaluated whether Adamant should allow the use of operators as regular prefix functions. This would be similar to how Haskell allows infix operators to be used as functions. Indeed, the syntax could have been the same. That is an operator could have been used as a function name by surrounding it with parentheses (i.e. `(+)(x, y)`). However, with the decision to follow the Scala 3 recommendation of having all operators be aliases for named functions, that becomes far less useful. The developer can always just use the function name.

The inverse of that is the ability to use functions as infix operators. In haskell this is done by surrounding the function name with backticks (i.e. ``x `div` y``). This is far less valuable in Adamant because most functions will be methods and therefore already have an "infix" notation. Additionally, it wouldn't be clear what precedence to give them. It would be especially confusing if they were aliased as operators that did have precedence. For example, ``x `plus` y `times` z`` might be expected to give higher precedence to the multiplication since that function was aliased as an operator with higher precedence. Finally, there didn't seem to be a good syntax for doing this that didn't use up symbols that could be better used for other purposes. Given all this it makes sense to not support using functions as infix operators unless experience shows it to be important.
